title:          Introducción_2
ID:             65
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      7098


<!-- 
Introducción más cool. Algo así como: en un objeto impreso de una hoja... o si no, apuntar lo que sabemos sobre la inclusión en el último momento de Delirio, y la paradoja que atraviesa el archivo "bolivariano". Entonces la provocación inicial puede ser algo así como: las políticas de archivo son también políticas de organización de la naturaleza

Lo interesante también sería proponer que Bolívar se agarra de un concepto "humboldtiano" para poner en suspenso la seguridad ontológica que le asigna agencia a unos pueblos, mientras subsume a otros en la "naturaleza"
 -->

The reading of the Humboldtian concept of nature in Bolivar has been made from _Mi delirio sobre el Chimborazo_, a text that had no public relevance until its posthumous publication, in 1833, and whose authenticity has been discussed. The recent anthology _The Latin American Cultural Reader_ begins the section dedicated to the founding of Latin American nation-states with a new translation of this prose poem. Probably written in 1822, on a festive occasion[1](#ftn1), it was part of the Libertador's private archive, an archive whose destruction Bolivar requested his aide-de-camp, the Irishman Laurence Florence O'Leary, and which O'Leary disobeyed. It is therefore problematic to define, from the _Delirio_, a concept of the natural world in Bolívar as "a terrain of power, used to metaphorically justify and amplify the claims to political legitimacy of local and regional elites on the eve of, during, and after the struggle for national independence" (French and Heffes 74). The text had no function in Bolivar's public life, and most probably belongs to what, as an author, he had the will to exclude from his work. Its reading would serve, in any case, to probe a certain understanding of nature in Bolívar's subjectivity, not to prove its instrumentalization to amplify the political legitimacy of the elites.

If there is a group of writers who made the representation of nature in the _Delirio_ "the rhetorical ground on which to stake their claims" (French and Heffes 75) –among whom the anthologists count Andrés Bello and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento–, Bolívar cannot be counted among them from the writing of this poem, for its circulation was not part of his project. Even more: if there was a project that promoted the circulation of this poem to instrumentalize it politically, it was precisely the one that emerged after his death, and against him. Or at least against his great project, which was the Gran Colombia and the Latin American supranationality. It was during the Venezuelan oligarchic government, which contributed to the dissolution of the great Andean-Caribbean republic[2](#ftn8), that this literary exercise, belonging to the intimacy of the Libertador, was published for the first time. It is the last text of the XXVII volume of the _Coleccion de documentos relativos a la vida pública del libertador de Columbia y del Peru, Simon Bolivar_, published in Caracas in 1933 by the Danniron and Dupouny Press.

There are other reasons why it is problematic to focus the analysis of the Humboldt-Bolivarian concept of nature on the 1822 controversially attributed manuscript. These I will evaluate later. For now I limit myself to propose that for this characterization of the Bolivarian nature, it would be necessary at least to contrast the _Delirio_ with documents that he had the will to make public during his lifetime. 
<!-- 'This is not the only time you way this and at this point it seems like we are going to read something a little bit different. Then you say once again "with this paper, I intend to...". Maybe try to join these two ideas a little bit tighter?' -->
This is what I propose to do in this article, where I will analyze the _Manifesto de Carúpano_ of 1814, the text that Bolívar proclaims to appear before the remnants of the republic after what was his most apotheosis defeat in his political life. As Fernando Coronil succinctly summarizes: "Bolívar brought over the revolutionary cause the unruly llaneros, mestizo plainsmen who initially supported the Spanish crown during the Independence War (1811-21). At the outset, the llaneros and rebel slaves made devastating attacks on the families and estates of the landed oligarchy, turning the conflict into a civil war with racial dimensions" (178). The _Manifesto_ is located in this_outset_ indicated by Coronil. Or more precisely, at the beginning of the transition that allowed Bolivar to include the llaneros in the republican project. It is the last text he makes public in Venezuela before leaving for Caribbean exile, from where he returns two years later with Haitian soldiers and the first decree abolishing slavery on the mainland.

To explain, in 1814, the defeat of his army at the hands of the llaneros, Bolivar resorts to an animalization of non-white populations -part of the slave production system of colonialism[3](#ftn9)-- by calling them "beasts." And to propose another point of Humboldtian influence in Bolivar's notion of nature, I note the echoes in this text of the first chapter of _Tableaux de la nature_, "Considérations sur les steppes et déserts" (1808), where the German characterizes the llanero populations of Asia as natural phenomena. Both Humboldt and Bolívar affirm limits of the human anchored to a pattern of civilization, in which certain forms of political or social organization that do not respond to these parameters are assimilated to the realm of the natural or non-human --as darkness, as animal, as geographical accident or self-generated agency of a certain landscape[4](#ftn10). But this dualistic vision becomes discontinuous and permeable in Bolivar's discourse when he calls the "beasts" "brothers." Similarly, Humboldt introduces in his text notions that put in suspense the ontological security that is sustained in the rigid division between human and nature. This notion of mutual contamination between what is conceived as human and what is conceived as non-human, will be put into work in Bolivar's political project, in an implicity broadening of the concept of humanity, which takes shape, again in Carúpano, with decree for the abolition of slavery in 1816.

With this paper I intend to contribute to the discussion on the role of the colonial world in the formation of the Anthropocene, 
<!-- 
- which is? maybe expand a little bit here, and take it again at the end
- connect back with what I said before -->
focusing on the so-called "first wave of decolonization" (Thurner et al.). I argue that the arc between the _Manifesto_ and Bolivar's _Decree of Abolition of the Slaves_, leads to an expanded postulation 

I propose that, read in the light of the _Manifiesto_ and its relation with Humboldt beyond an aesthetic framework, the messianic and promethean high-flownness of Bolivar's private poetic text of 1822 expresses a radicalized dimension of the global, that manifests itself in the first wave of decolonization, and that unlike the European global that serves as a paradigm for Chakrabarty is not restricted to a limited number of members of the species.

