title:          Introducción
ID:             31
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4731


In scholarly and activist conversation, "decolonial" agency is presented as counterpart and even antidote to the Anthropocene<!--note: examples-->. The assumption is affirmed in the tensions, problems, and injustices condensed by the term coined by Paul Cruzen in 2000. As Donna Haraway and Jason Moore among others point out<!--note: examples-->: attributing to the human species as an abstract whole the emergence and adoption of modes of production, mobility and consumption that threaten the habitability of the Earth blurs the historical character of these modes. In particular, it makes invisible the relations of oppression and inequity on which the civilizational model that is now in crisis was founded. And it is precisely the societies, peoples, ethnicities, genders and territories systematically spoliated by coloniality that are most problematic to homologize, under the vague "anthropos", as agents of catastrophe.

To dispel the historic vagueness implied by the idea of "Anthropocene", Moore and Haraway have proposed terms that politicize geohuman agency: "Capitalocene" and "Plantationcene" <!--note-->. Both terms emphasize coloniality as the foundation of the civilizational model, particularly the periods known in historiography as the Columbian Exchange and Atlantic Slave Trade <!--note-->.  According to Dipesh Chakrabarty, during the same period the "Lockean notion of personhood"--constructed since the seventeenth century--produced a point of "indifference to the biosphere built into political thought." Thus, the white Western individual became "the center, the bearer of life and rights and the recipient of well-being. Thereby is gestated what the Indian historian calls "the global": an instance of the world where the sovereignty of the human over nature presupposes its right to exploit it unlimitedly <!--(5)(212) (#ftn11)-->

Although Chakrabarty has been a major influence in coining and defining the Anthropocene in the humanities <!--note-->, his historicization presents a good case for proponents of the nominal controversy. If Locke formulated the notions of "personhood" and the "global," in 1682 he was also --as Jason Moore and Raj Patel remind us-- the writer of the <!--Fundamental Constitutions of Carolina-->, which states that "every Freeman (...) shall have absolute power and Authority over his Negro slaves" [-;;MooreYPatel 192]. That is to say, Locke was a sort of double agent of the Anthropocene: on the one hand, a formulator of metaphysical notions that order unlimited human possession and exploitation over nature; and on the other hand he was a legislator who regulated the unlimited possession and exploitation of some humans over others. This double agency shows in a nutshell the fundamental contradiction of the Anthropocene: the unlimited sovereignty of the "human" over "nature" passed through --or was founded on-- the unlimited sovereignty of certain members of the species over the bodies of others. The condition of possibility of the "global" as the polar opposite of an infinitely exploitable nature was to categorically exclude the greater part of the species from the "globe" in order to place it on the "side" of nature.

The term "Anthropocene" thus exposes a dimension of the problem of geohuman agency that does not exclude but complements those exposed by the emphasis on the mode of production. For the relations of oppression, inequity and injustice on which this is sustained were founded on the establishment of humanity --of the "*anthropos*"-- as an exclusive club. A club that had the "natural" right to the unlimited exploitation of the rest of existence, be they homo-sapiens or not. What I call "decolonial Anthropocene" is a punctual intervention on this dimension of the geohuman problem: that of the limit between some members of the species and others. This occurs in the period that ;;Sheppard and ;;ThurnerOla call the First Wave of Decolonization. Against the grain of the dominant discourse in the "decolonial turn," Sheppar and Turner propose an approach to nineteenth-century decolonization that does not presuppose the failure of the project, but rather examines it in terms of its own ambitions and goals (viii, xix-x). In this essay I propose to advance this premise in the key of cultural criticism in order to approach two texts by Simón Bolívar: *Mi delirio sobre el Chimborazo* (1824) and the *Manifiesto de Carúpano* (1814). In them I characterize a crisis of the limits that organized the existence of humans and resources on one side or the other of the organizing framework named "nature". And I explore a dimension of the "decolonial" that is not antinomic to the formation of the Anthropocene but part of its constitution.