title:          A hell beyond the Delirio
ID:             34
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      8724


<!-- do a transition to manifesto out of this 

<!-- Aquí la naturaleza no es un marco referencial paisajístico, sobresaturado de referencias mitológicas por un escritor amateur.
To explain, in 1814, the defeat of his army at the hands of the llaneros, Bolivar resorts to an animalization of non-white populations -part of the slave production system of colonialism[3](#ftn9)-- by calling them "beasts." 


And to propose another point of Humboldtian influence in Bolivar's notion of nature, I note the echoes in this text of the first chapter of _Tableaux de la nature_, "Considérations sur les steppes et déserts" (1808), where the German characterizes the llanero populations of Asia as natural phenomena. Both Humboldt and Bolívar affirm limits of the human anchored to a pattern of civilization, in which certain forms of political or social organization that do not respond to these parameters are assimilated to the realm of the natural or non-human --as darkness, as animal, as geographical accident or self-generated agency of a certain landscape[4](#ftn10). But this dualistic vision becomes discontinuous and permeable in Bolivar's discourse when he calls the "beasts" "brothers." Similarly, Humboldt introduces in his text notions that put in suspense the ontological security that is sustained in the rigid division between human and nature. This notion of mutual contamination between what is conceived as human and what is conceived as non-human, will be put into work in Bolivar's political project, in an implicity broadening of the concept of humanity, which takes shape, again in Carúpano, with decree for the abolition of slavery in 1816.

-->

In order to understand the density of the text I am going to analyze, it is necessary to give some clues about its writing context, and about the reality it tries to name. Tito Salas, in _Emigración a Oriente_, shows in a nutshell the so-called "Terrible Year" of 1814. The white Creole elite of Caracas, flees to the Eastern part of the country. Children, women, the elderly and white men, some of them barefoot, trudge over rough terrain, led by someone carrying the Venezuelan flag. Some of them are looking back, connoting the horror that haunts them. They are fleeing from a popular rebellion that rose up against the republican project, led by a caudillo of Spanish origin, but starring the vastly majority non-white population of the country <!-- agregar nota apoyado en Castro-Gómez y otros para indicar a qué me refiero con esta categoría -->. José Tomás Boves had organized in the Venezuelan plains an irregular army with the most oppressed and excluded population of Venezuelan society. A population that the pro-independence Creole elite wanted to use rhetorically in a discourse of equality, without granting social rights. And even more: by rolling back concessions that the Spanish empire had begun to make during the Bourbon reforms. A significant part of this rebel army had been enslaved on the plantation and had been freed by the royalist army to be enlisted. But the army of rebels that converged on the Venezuelan plains was less uniform than that of Haiti, where the overwhelming majority came directly from the slave trade. The excluded palette of Boves' llaneros ranged from people coming from the slave trade to absolute outsiders, who were in no way part of Venezuelan legality[7](#ftn13). This may give us an idea of what Bolivar means by "infernal regions" in the _Delirio_.

I will quote the Dominican Republic author Juan Bosch, who summarizes the problem in his book _Bolivar y la guerra social_: "Bolivar thought and acted in terms of society, and that is why his struggle was aimed at the creation of a State, and Boves felt and acted in terms of the mass, and that mass was at war against the society of which he had been a part". That is why the _Manifiesto_ expresses much more than a military defeat: it expresses the inability to conquer the desire of the masses. It expresses the fact that the republicans were not defeated by the Spanish empire, but by the very people they intended to liberate. It is the dramatic aporia expressed when he says: "Thus, it would seem that heaven, to bring us humiliation and then glory, allowed our conquerors to be our brothers and our brothers, no one else, to triumph over us". This aporia is much more dense and interesting when we think of the regime of dichotomous tropes in which it is inserted. Bolivar defeated by his own people divides the social and national world into men/beasts and free/slaves, and at the same time establishes a filial, fraternal relationship between those opposites. If the journey of the _Delirio_ is from east to west, from the Orinoco Delta to the Andes, the exodus of 1814 goes in the opposite direction. <!-- Unpack what is comming. Explain what is  this and give a foreshsadow of how it contributes to argue with Chakrabarty --> And if in the Delirio an integrating look of the territory is postulated in the poetic imagination, in the _Manifesto_ it is a matter of assimilating a rupture through the political imagination.

The movement that dominates the _Manifesto_ is toward a reaffirmation of "the age-old humanist distinction between natural history and human history," that the anthropogenic explanations of climate change spell in the contemporary conversation (Dipesh Chakrabarty 201). The punch line of the manifesto radicalizes this division into a series of equivalent dualities. Stating that "one cannot compare spirit with matter," Bolívar defines a division of nationality into incommensurable groups of you-men-free-spirit (whites) and them-beasts-slaves-matter (non-whites). However, in the previous development, attributes have been given to these entities, which pollute the boundaries of this division. The beast-slaves are, in addition to brothers, "compatriots," "mass of the peoples," "frenzied multitude," and "vulgar men," whose spirit has been perverted or deluded and who suffer from "insanity." These last two attributes are especially relevant because they are conditions to which these free-men, supposedly incommensurable with the beast-slaves, are also exposed. Dementia is a threat that hangs over the "you" when Bolivar asks them to "not alienate you"–and retrospectively, it is privately acknowledged as an attribute, albeit a passing one, of the same author eight years later in the _Delirio_. And the "perverted spirit" implies a contamination in two senses: the "matter" embodied by the slave beasts has also a spirit, though perverted; and the spirit of free men may be perverted, as the threat of alienation suggests.

The attribute most often repeated for the "they" is that of the slave. And although this attribute also appears in the _Manifiesto_ as potentially assignable to free men – "against those blind (…) chains," this condition, in the context that Bolivar writes, is very hardly commensurable. At this point, Bolívar still employs the trope of slavery in the sense of John Locke, who uses it both as a synonym for tyranny and as the almost always ineffable antithesis of the free human, to whom God has granted sovereignty over nature in _Two Treatises of Government_. This rhetorical use of the "slave" signifier in Bolivar's context becomes especially problematic in light of "the social death imparted on Indigenous Americans and enslaved Africans [which] are certainly two originary catastrophes forming the basis of global modernity and systematically repressed in discourse" (Saldanha 22) As Buck-Morss demonstrates, European liberalism was able to speculate limitlessly with the trope of the slave, without clashing with the concrete referent of the system of production that sustained it economically. But in Bolivar the trope of chains and the slave acquired a weight totally unprecedented among the "philosophers of freedom" who promoted the division between human history and natural history (Chakrabarty 208). And this had consequences: the _Manifiesto_, in which he most rudely boasted of the free status of some compatriots and denigrated the slavery of others based based on such division, was also his last proclamation in Venezuela before the decree of emancipation of the slaves, in 1816, after a two-year Caribbean exile.  The _Manifiesto_ is just the beginning of the transition towards an abolitionist period of the Emancipation movement. But already these points of mutual contamination between white spirit-men-freemen and non-white spirit-beasts-slaves-matter foreshadow a dissolution of the boundary that reserved, in the European "philosophers of freedom" human sovereignty over nature to a portion of the species, while enabling the exploitation as bestial matter of the rest of it.

