title:          ​Bolívar Superstar
ID:             32
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      6247


As Fernando Coronil succinctly summarizes: "Bolívar brought over the revolutionary cause the unruly llaneros, mestizo plainsmen who initially supported the Spanish crown during the Independence War (1811-21). At the outset, the llaneros and rebel slaves made devastating attacks on the families and estates of the landed oligarchy, turning the conflict into a civil war with racial dimensions" (178). The _Manifesto_ is located in this_outset_ indicated by Coronil. Or more precisely, at the beginning of the transition that allowed Bolivar to include the llaneros in the republican project. It is the last text he makes public in Venezuela before leaving for Caribbean exile, from where he returns two years later with Haitian soldiers and the first decree abolishing slavery on the mainland. <!-- En ese sentido, es un texto escrito bajo el peso de un *reality check*: quien había recibido el título de "Libertador" en 1813, huía del país, junto con la clase patricia sobreviviente de Caracas, perseguidos por el pueblo que supuestamente él había llegado a "liberar". Más adelante volveré sobre la atmósfera haunted y aciaga que rodea al _Manifiesto_. Ahora solo quiero subrayar su cualidad de _grounded_, en contraste con lo explícitamente delirante de 1822.

El _Delirio_ de hecho, puede leerse ante todo como una alegoría --si bien un poco confusa-- del literal delirio de grandeza al que, dadas las circunstancias, se exponía Bolívar en 1822-->. To address how famous he was him in the 1820's in the U.S. we can think of Orlando Bolívar Willcox and Simón Bolívar Buckner. They fought together in the Mexican-American War, and against each other in the U.S. American Civil War. Born in 1823, they were among many children in the US being named after El Libertador by those years [note: <!-- BY 'George Azcarate' Harper's ferry, the site of Abolitionist John Brown's slave rebellion was also named after Simon Bolivar. http://www.bolivarwv.org/the-name.html' + Lord Byron-->]. He was already the "libertador" of a territory that today is equivalent to four countries --Ecuador, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama-- and was preparing to lead the emancipation of two more --Peru and Alto Peru, which was named after him, Bolivia. He was also the leader of the most far-reaching abolitionist movement in the world, following in Haiti's footsteps in the Mainland. <!-- Es un hombre cercano a la gloria, querido por su pueblo, reconocido por las potencias del Atlántico Norte, e ídolo de poetas y guerreros. Muy lejano de quien salía al exilio en 1814, desprestigiado ante la opinión pública internacional, perseguido por la parte más oprimida de su "pueblo" y bajo amenaza de fusilamiento por sus propios soldados <referencias>-->

On the superstar scale, deified, is where Bolivar's poem is written, and also where it is read. This is explicit in the the radically zenithal gaze of the "watchtower of the Universe", in the Promethean excess of "nothing will stop me" and "not even time could hold back freedom". <!-- Pero es un rasgo que recorre todo el poema-->. It is a poetic voice --which I will call Bolívar-- that rubs shoulders with the gods and accepts no lessons from them. Bolívar comes wrapped in an accessory of the emissary of the gods, Iris -–which might be also interpreted as an epithet of the Colombian flag. He comes from the Columbus Channel, "where the Orinoco pays its tribute to the god of the waters." He sets out to climb what was believed to be the highest peak in the 19th century --and which recent measurements have confirmed <reference>. After comparing himself to a third deity[6](#ftn12), claiming that he left behind Humboldt's and La Condamaine's tracks, and being possessed by the "God of Colombia", he meets Chronos –"God of Time"– who tries to give him a lesson on the smallness of his exploits in the face of the size of infinity. Bolívar contradicts him, still possessed by the God of Colombia. His objection seems to change the opinion of Chronos, who no longer insists on pointing out Bolivar's hybris, but recommends him to share with men these visions, which he qualifies as "truth". 

The deity disappears, revealing that in reality he was not a god but a phantom ("fantasma") --although the translator corrects, transcribing it as "apparition." Colombia cries out, without it being clear whether "Colombia"" is an apocope for "God of Colombia," or whether Colombia is another character: a more complicated but more coherent hypothesis, since according to the plot at this moment Bolívar and the God of Colombia are the same person. But we finally learn that Bolívar had been dead all that time, and that he recovers his condition "of man", to get up and write the text we read. These confuse moments lead Jiménez to point out that the allegorical quality of this exercise is highly ambiguous: "[t]he secrets referred to in Time are not obvious, as they could allude to the experience of disillusionment (to the realization of the vanity of the human in the face of the greatness of Chimborazo and Time) or to what has been learned from the eminence of the mountain, which provides a real and metaphorical point of view that extends beyond the usual" (12). On the other hand, with his abuse of classical mythological tropes, Bolivar incurs here in the fault that he claims to José Joaquín Olmedo, when he writes a critique of his _Canto a Junín_: "[yo]u make us in your poetic and fantastic way; and to continue in the country of poetry the fiction of the fable, you elevate us with your lying deity, as the eagle of Jupiter lifted the tortoise to the skies to let it fall on a rock that would break its creeping limbs: you, then, have sublimated us so much that you have precipitated us into the abyss of nothingness." 

But the flaws of _Delirio_ not only contrast with Bolívar's concept about American poetics: they contrast with a written work of great depth, originality and strength, in the terrain of personal correspondence, proclamation and political essay. His only literary exercise is more exceptional than representative of his writing, and as Muñoz states, it is probably "the most bizarre text Bolívar ever composed" (171). Why has it been, then, so relevant in the study of Bolívar's nature writing?