title:          Bolívar Superstar
ID:             32
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4499


As Fernando Coronil summarizes: 

> Bolivar incorporated into the revolutionary cause the revolting llaneros, mestizo peasants who initially supported the Spanish crown during the War of Independence (1811-21). In the outset, the llaneros and rebel slaves carried out devastating attacks against the families and haciendas of the landed oligarchy, turning the conflict into a civil war of racial dimensions" (178).

Bolívar writes, pronounces and prints the *Manifesto* is  this "outset". Namely, at the beginning of the transition that allowed him to include the "mestizo peasants" and "rebel slaves" in the republican project. The *Manifesto* is the last text he makes public in Venezuela before leaving for Caribbean exile, from where he returns two years later with Haitian ships, soldiers and printing press, to publish the first decree abolishing slavery enacted on the mainland in America. However, the beginning of that transition was not heroic but horrifying.The _Manifesto_ is a text written under the weight of a *reality check*: he who had received the title of "Liberator" in 1813, fled the country, together with the surviving patrician class of Caracas, persecuted by the people he had supposedly come to "liberate".

Instead, Bolivar writes the *Delirio* in the infatuated perspective of a celebrity <!--note: about the Bolivars-->, where those difficulties and catastrophes are blurred. The elevation is explicit in the radically zenithal gaze of the "atalaya del Universo," in the Promethean excess of "nada me detendrá" and "ni siquiera el tiempo podrá detener la marcha de la libertad." It is a poetic voice that rubs shoulders with the gods and accepts no lessons from them. He comes "envuelto" in an accessory of the emissary of the gods, Iris --which he later makes explicit as an epithet of the Grancolombian <!--nota--> "estandarte"-- and sets out to climb the highest peak on the planet. <!--[note: on the controversy]-->. After comparing himself to a third deity<!--[6](#ftn12)-->, he encounters the "Dios del Tiempo". He tries to instruct him on the smallness of his exploits in the face of the size of infinity. Bolivar contradicts him, and seems to convince him because "el Tiempo" recommends him to share with the humankind these hallucinations, which he qualifies as "truth". The deity disappears and reveals that in reality he was not a god but an "apparition [*fantasma*]". Finally Bolivar recovers his condition of "hombre", to get up and write the text we are reading.


An unprejudiced analysis of the poem would force us to recognize, as Muñoz Jiménez does, the confusing nature of the allegory. It is also fair to recognize that this is "el texto más estrafalario que haya compuesto Bolívar" (-;;MunozJimenez 12, 171). A text that contrasts with a solid work in the field of personal correspondence, proclamation and political essay. Without going too far, in a letter to José Joaquín Olmedo <!--of what year-->, Bolívar criticizes his "Canto a Junín" under premises that would suffice to destroy *Delirio* as well: "[t]ú (...) nos elevas con tu deidad mentirosa, [...] nos has sublimado tanto que nos has precipitado en el abismo de la nada" [;;BolivarOlmedo pp]. But the cardboard gods and the empty sublimation that Bolivar criticizes in Olmedo overshadow the *Delirio* to its full extent. However, Abreu Mendoza reaffirms the value attributed to the poem, as a proof that the experience of American nature in Humboldt and Bolivar "invariably concludes in the poetization of the natural sublime through writing" (295).

According to Abreu Mendoza, the function of this poem would be to appropriate those areas of nature whose immediate value "within the parameters of progress, enlightenment and secularization" is not defined.Thus, from the _Delirio_ --and from another verifiably apocryphal text, the _Juramento de Roma_[;;RotkerApocrifo pp] --, he specifies the relationship between Bolívar's nature writing and that of figures such as Andrés Bello and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento suggested by the *LAER*.  His precision consists in grouping them as authors who "perpetuated the sublime as the hegemonic lens through which to observe and write about Latin American nature" [-;;AbreuMendoza pp]. Thus, Bolivar's writing on Chimborazo, and his intertext with Humboldt would be assimilable and homologous to a great Latin American tradition that employs the sublime as a "hegemonic lens" to aestheticize nature when it cannot be assimilated as a resource or knowledge.