title:          El lente desarmado de lo sublime
ID:             143
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4382


Indeed, in Bolivar's poem there is evidence of the intention to represent an experience such as those which, according to Immanuel Kant's definition:

> raise the strength of our soul above its usual level, and enable us to discover in ourselves a capacity of resistance of another kind, which gives us the courage to measure ourselves against the apparent omnipotence of nature [;;Kant 145]. 

This idea is schematically allegorized since, on reaching the summit of the volcano, the voice of *Delirium* feels ""un fuego extraño y superior." But strangeness in this text is a brief coquetry to always and quickly return to a habitual frame that blurs the otherness of the unknown. In this case, the "strangeness" of the fire does not even last a line because the voice immediately recognizes it as "the God of Colombia", who "possesses" it. During this "posesión", the voice of the beginning and the voice of the "Dios de Colombia" become merged, and have a dialogue with Time personified. For this entity, the hero-God's exploits are insignificant.  The voice recognizes for an instant that the experience overcomes him "sobrecogido de un terror sagrado". But it immediately goes on to justify itself. He asks rhetorically "¿cómo (...) no ha desvanecerse el mísero mortal que ha subido tan alto?". And he presents his visionary experience to argue that "llego al Eterno con mis manos", and that there is nothing that amazes him or that he cannot measure [;;BolivarDelirio pp]. 

As I advanced, the rejoinder of "el Tiempo" is complacent with the *hybris* of the "mísero mortal". He does not insist on the impossibilities of measuring "sin asombro (...) la materia", or of reaching "al Eterno con mis manos". Rather, he reaffirms that his hallucinations are a revealed truth, and assigns him the mission of remembering and preaching it: "conserva en tu mente lo que has visto, dibuja a los ojos de tus semejantes el cuadro del Universo físico, del Universo moral; no escondas los secretos que el cielo te ha revelado" [;;BolivarDelirio pp]. Yet the poem's ending again seems to leave a crack open to the "capacity for resistance of another kind" that Kant attributes to the experience of the sublime. However, both in the delirious moment and when he has said "resucito, me incorporo, abro con mis propias manos los pesados párpados" [;;BolivarDelirio pp] the voice of the poem perceives as commensurable and homologous the universe of the gods and the universe of men. First, the voice remains for a long time "[a]bsorto, yerto (...)[,] exánime" [;;BolivarDelirio pp]. Then he seems to recognize the scene of dialogue with Time as a "delirio," along with all the *hybris* it displays. But the poem's penultimate sentence blocks this possibility when he states that "vuelvo a ser hombre," suggesting that on the diegetic plane of wakefulness the voice continues to think that for a time he was the God of Colombia.

There is nothing in the writing of *Delirio* that indicates "nature in its most chaotic, unlimited and terrifying dimension," which, as Zizek reminds us, is the one "suitable for awakening (...) in us the feeling of the Sublime: there, where the aesthetic imagination is forced to the utmost, where all finite determinations dissolve, [and] lack appears in the purest" [-;;Zizek 260]. The "I" of the poem remains within the usual neoclassical limits, where the totality of matter is measurable, and the gods are reducible to stereotypical representations with which one can converse on a one-to-one basis. But *Delirio* stages, better than an accomplished poem, the failure of the imagination to give form to lofty ideas that reason conceives. In its failure, it exhibits the basic mechanism by which the modern subject deals with the realms of nature that exceed what is useful to science and economy: it recognizes the overwhelming, challenges itself to endure what exceeds it, makes fragmentary and accidental contact with transcendence without mastering it, and expresses its experience with what images it can. If he were an experienced poet or even a non-fiction writer --like Bello and Sarmiento-- the writing may have been an observation of "American nature" through "the hegemonic lens" of the sublime. But in a writer of proclamations, manifestos and letters who does only one literary exercise in his life, what appears in his poetry is only the "hegemonic lens".