title:          Un infierno más allá del Delirio
ID:             34
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4643


If the *Delirio* shows much more the "hegemonic lens" than a sublime experience of the natural world, this does not imply that it is "hardly about nature," as Abreu Mendoza [-;;AbreuMendoza pp] proposes. For, as I will show, in the *Manifiesto* "nature" is first and foremost a line that separates humans from the rest of the planet, and certain groups of humans from others. That is, "nature" is a way of organizing existences, and also a cultural technology for enframing them. That is why the shift I propose from *Delirio* to the *Manifesto* to characterize Bolívar's writing of "nature" has not to do with one speaking a metaphorical language and the other a referential language: it has to do with the amateur and idle poetry of *Delirio* being a rather diluted echo of the experience of the sublime that operates in the programmatic and foundational writing of *Manifesto* [note: credit <to NeMLA's corduroy>].

The *Delirio* postulates a poetic and imaginary integration of different regions that make up the South American territory [-;;Manzoni pp]. The poetic voice integrates in its journey, under the "estandarte" of the nascent --and brief-- nation-state of la Gran Colombia, territories separated by the dense South American mountain ranges. Therefore, among the arguments given by the voice to "trepar sobre los cabellos canosos del gigante de la tierra", he recalls his previous exploits and concludes that "la tierra se ha allanado a los pies de Colombia". For this, he lists the obstacles he has overcome with the "manto", which becomes the subject of the action. It is he who "en mis manos", travels through "regiones infernales", crosses "los ríos y los mares", and climbs "sobre los hombros gigantescos de los andes" [;;BolivarDelirio pp]. In the enumeration, all the obstacles are natural, with the exception of the first one. And it in this irregularity the landscape and allegorical nature of *Delirio* begins to converse with the categorical and programmatic nature of the *Manifiesto*.

Pronounced and printed about 120 km --in a straight line on the map-- from the mouth of the Orinoco, in the peninsula of Paria, the *Manifiesto* closes for Bolívar a cycle of the war that Venezuelan romantic historians narrated plagued with tropes of the underworld [note: <blanco y gonzález>]. It is the "outset" referred to by Coronil, which other historians have called "terrible year" "social war", "popular rebellion" or "civil war" [note: <>, Bosh, Úslar-Pietri, Vallenilla-Lanz]: the "civil war of racial proportions" that Bolívar describes as a "piélago de calamidades, cuyo aspecto sólo hace estremecer a la naturaleza, y que sería tan horroroso como imposible pintaros" [;;BolivarManifiesto pp]. This unrepresentable "aspecto" that makes "estremecer a la naturaleza" in the *Manifiesto*, is suggested by Tito Salas' 1913 painting _Emigración a Oriente_. The white Creole elite of Caracas flees to the east of the country. Children, women, old men and white men, some of them barefoot, walk painfully over rough terrain, guided by someone carrying the Venezuelan flag. Some look back, connoting the horror that haunts them. It is the horror "imposible de poder pintaros": the llaneros, "mestizo peasants" and "rebel slaves" who rose up against the republican project. <!--remate: apoyado en Castro-Gómez y otros, sobre la cercanía de esta población con la naturaleza, y foreshadowing del determinismo de los llanos -->

[cuadro]

Of course, Bolivar's insistence on including the *Manifiesto* in the edition of his works probably does not seek to exalt that episode of "anarquía devoradora" in the deed of independence, but perhaps his own perseverance. Before followers whom "[v]uestros hermanos y no los españoles han desgarrado vuestro seno, derramando vuestra sangre, incendiando vuestros hogares, y os han condenado a la expatriación", he promises what seems impossible -- "volver a libertaros"-- and eventually at least partially fulfills it [;;BolivarManifiesto pp]. In this sense, the programmatic dimension of the *Manifiesto* and its concept of nature seems to close, like the *Delirio*, the opening into the unknown. But the writing of the *Manifesto* does not have the "regiones infernales" in the past participle, as a surpassed feat that is evoked to motivate future ones: it is written, printed and published in the heat of the horror that cannot be painted. And as I will show, this experiential proximity to the unrepresentable produces a texture where the limits and hierarchies between humanity and nature are cracked and contact is made with a "capacity for resistance of another kind" that in *Delirio* blurs.