title:          Transition to Manifiesto 1
ID:             56
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      2053



It is true that in the particular case of nature writing and Humboldt's influence on Bolívar, the _Delirio_ is inevitable as a starting point. The poetic voice measures himself on equal terms with Alexander von Humboldt –according to the actual friendship that they had and that is by Tito Salas in Paris, at the beginning of 19th century –, and claims to leave his "tracks behind". Besides, Bolivar's prose exercise is fundamentally an attempt to make an epic allegory out of the German's geographical imagination of the new world, from the Orinoco to the Andes, passing through the Amazon jungle and the plains. However, staying there has two disadvantages. The first is the one I have already pointed out: Bolivar's only literary writing is unlikely representative of his oeuvre, on the one hand, and on the other hand it is also probably the least relevant in terms of modern state building--which is what Bolivar is a relevant author for. The second disadvantage is that, as Jiménez points out, _Delirio_ is hardly about nature, since "the explicit omnipresence of the self, the identification of the narrative self with the biographical self, and the use of nature to reflect on a subjectivity before which, in the end, nature disappears and to which it ends up ceding all protagonism" (13). Therefore, to unpack a concept of nature in Bolívar, it is necessary to have a closer look to the territorial dimension of the Bolivarian experience. The _Manifiesto_ approaches us to a moment prior to Bolivar's abolitionist superstardom, where the tension with the "Humboldt tracks" is less evident but more significant for the process of South American emancipation in general, and particularly for the epistemic crisis that was part of this process --and which Bolivar allegorizes with his "head" grazing "the summit of the firmament". Is this what I post that can be found in the _Manifiesto_: the closing statement of the so called "Terrible Year" of 1814, in which Bolívar recognized its project as one "gigantic and superior to all human strength."
