title:          ​Bolívar Superstar
ID:             32
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      7218



The delirium of grandeur that Bolivar poetically thematizes in his private text, resonates the aura of world celebrity that Bolivar had at that time. To address how famous he was him in the 1820's in the U.S. we can think of Orlando Bolívar Willcox and Simón Bolívar Buckner<!-- BY 'George Azcarate'
ON '2021-08-31T16:59:55'
NOTE: 'FYI Harper's ferry, the site of Abolitionist John Brown's slave rebellion was also named after Simon Bolivar. http://www.bolivarwv.org/the-name.html' -->. They fought together in the Mexican-American War, and against each other in the U.S. American Civil War. Born in 1823, they were among many children in the US being named after El Libertador by those years. In 1822, when he wrote the Delirio sobre el Chimborazo, he was already the liberator of a territory that today is equivalent to four countries --Ecuador, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama-- and was preparing to lead the emancipation of two more --Peru and Alto Peru, which was named after him, Bolivia. He was also the leader of the most far-reaching abolitionist movement in the world, following in Haiti's footsteps in the Mainland. On that superstar scale, deified, is where Bolivar's poem is written --and also where it is read. This deification can be read in the _Delirio_, in the the radically zenithal gaze of the "watchtower of the Universe", in the Promethean excess of "nothing will stop me" and "not even time could hold back freedom". It is a poetic voice --which we will call Bolivar-- that rubs shoulders with the gods and accepts no lessons from them.

Tracking how such deification is built on this narrative poem might help to put in perspective both the relation with Humboldt and how limited it is to establish from it a perspective on Bolivarian writing. Bolivar comes wrapped in an accessory of the emissary of the gods, Iris –which might be also interpreted as an epithet of the Colombian flag. He comes from the Columbus Channel, "where the Orinoco pays its tribute to the god of the waters." He sets out to climb what was believed to be the highest peak in the 19th century and which recent measurements have confirmed, given its distance from the center of the Earth. After comparing himself to a third deity[6](#ftn12), claiming that he left behind Humboldt's and La Condamaine'd tracks, and being possessed by the God of Colombia, he meets Chronos –"God of Time"– who tries to give him a lesson on the smallness of his exploits in the face of the size of infinity. Bolivar contradicts him, still possessed by the God of Colombia. He argues that his exploits and a series of visions enable him to evanesce himself. His objection seems to change the opinion of Chronos, who no longer insists on pointing out Bolivar's hybris, but recommends him to share with men these visions, which he qualifies as "truth". Then he disappears, revealing that in reality he was not a god but a phantom ("fantasma") –an ambiguity or flaw that the translator dissolves by transcribing it as "apparition." Colombia cries out, without it being clear whether "Colombia"" is an apocope for "God of Colombia," or whether Colombia is another character --which, although complicated, would be more coherent, since according to the plot at this moment Bolivar and the God of Colombia are the same person. Finally, we learn that Bolivar had been dead all that time, and that he recovers his condition of man, to get up and write the text we read.

As Jiménez has pointed out, the allegorical quality of this exercise is highly ambiguous: "[t]he secrets referred to in Time are not obvious, as they could allude to the experience of disillusionment (to the realization of the vanity of the human in the face of the greatness of Chimborazo and Time) or to what has been learned from the eminence of the mountain, which provides a real and metaphorical point of view that extends beyond the usual" (12). On the other hand, with his saturation of classical mythological references, Bolivar incurs here in the fault that he claims to José Joaquín Olmedo, when he writes a critique of his _Canto a Junín_: "[yo]u make us in your poetic and fantastic way; and to continue in the country of poetry the fiction of the fable, you elevate us with your lying deity, as the eagle of Jupiter lifted the tortoise to the skies to let it fall on a rock that would break its creeping limbs: you, then, have sublimated us so much that you have precipitated us into the abyss of nothingness." The way in which this text contradicts Bolívar's own criteria regarding what is fatuous in the writing of the American epic, and its elusive allegorical sense are sufficient reasons to question its protagonic consideration to characterize a concept of nature in Bolívar. It is hard to think that a poem like this would have been so commented and edited if it were not part of Bolivar's superstardom. El Libertador has a written work of great depth, originality and strength, but his genres were personal correspondence, proclamation and political essay. This literary exercise is more exceptional than representative of him as Muñoz states, it is probably "the most bizarre text Bolívar ever composed" (171).

It is true that in the particular case of nature writing and Humboldt's influence on Bolívar, the _Delirio_ is inevitable as a starting point. The poetic voice measures himself on equal terms with Alexander von Humboldt –according to the actual friendship that they had and that is by Tito Salas in Paris, at the beginning of 19th century –, and claims to leave his "tracks behind". Besides, Bolivar's prose exercise is fundamentally an attempt to make an epic allegory out of the German's geographical imagination of the new world, from the Orinoco to the Andes, passing through the Amazon jungle and the plains. However, staying there has two disadvantages. The first is the one I have already pointed out: Bolivar's only literary writing is unlikely representative of his oeuvre, on the one hand, and on the other hand it is also probably the least relevant in terms of modern state building--which is what Bolivar is a relevant author for. The second disadvantage is that, as Jiménez points out, _Delirio_ is hardly about nature, since "the explicit omnipresence of the self, the identification of the narrative self with the biographical self, and the use of nature to reflect on a subjectivity before which, in the end, nature disappears and to which it ends up ceding all protagonism" (13). Therefore, to unpack a concept of nature in Bolívar, it is necessary to have a closer look to the territorial dimension of the Bolivarian experience. The _Manifiesto_ approaches us to a moment prior to Bolivar's abolitionist superstardom, where the tension with the "Humboldt tracks" is less evident but more significant for the process of South American emancipation in general, and particularly for the epistemic crisis that was part of this process --and which Bolivar allegorizes with his "head" grazing "the summit of the firmament". Is this what I post that can be found in the _Manifiesto_: the closing statement of the so called "Terrible Year" of 1814, in which Bolívar recognized its project as one "gigantic and superior to all human strength."

