title:          ​Geography against history
ID:             36
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4665


The boundaries drawn by Humboldt in "Considérations" between the forms of civilization recognized by the European tradition and the political agency of other populations are much more subtle than the dichotomies of Bolivar in 1814. Nevertheless, his typification of the llanos in the first chapter of this essay–focused on Venezuela but fueled by equivalences and solutions of continuity with other "steppes and deserts of the world"–is strongly echoed in Bolívar's manifesto.

Humboldt makes an observation that prefigures the symbolic role that the vast plains region of Venezuela played in 1814, where the "devouring anarchy" of Boves' army that frustrated Bolivar's republic project was formed: "[t]he plains of southern America also serve as a limit to the semi-civilization imported from Europe" (Humboldt 34-35). Humboldt defines this region as "frightful solitude (…) [with S]elvas of impenetrable depth" that lies to the south of "industrious cities, laughing villages and carefully cultivated fields" (35). That is to say, the llanero limit to semi-civilization that Humboldt defines is a purely geographical entity, without human agency. In this vein, according to Humboldt's observations of the Asian plains, the ambiguously human agency of the llaneros could be attributed to the geographical entity. After stating that the steppes of Mongolia and Tartary have been a geographical barrier between the "people who are still rude" ("des peuples encore grossiers") and the "the race of anciently civilized men" ("la race d'hommes anciennement civilisés") of Hindustan and Tibet, he asserts: "But it is not only in this respect that history must consider the plains of the interior of Asia. They have more than once spread misfortune and devastation over the whole earth. The pastoral peoples who inhabit them, such as the Avars, the Mongols, the Alans and the Uzes, have shaken the world" ("Mais ce n'est pas seulement sous ces rapports que l'histoire doit considérer les plaines de l'intérieur de l'Asie. Elles ont plus d'une fois d'une fois répandu sur toute la terre le malheur et la dévastation. Les peuples pasteurs qui les habitent, tels que les Avares, les Mongols, les Alains et les Uzes, ont ébranlé le monde.") (Humboldt 15)

In Humboldt's observation, the agency of certain peoples belongs to geography. The Asiatic plainsmen moved the world to bring calamity and devastation. But the action wasn't performed by the plainsmen, but by the plains, whose barbarism "have more than once spread misfortune and devastation over the whole earth" ("ont plus d'une fois d'une fois répendu sur toute la terre le malheur et la dévastation") (16). That is, if Humboldt elaborated from the experience of the Andean mountains a view of nature that dwarfs and dominates humans (Mary Louise Pratt quoted by Mendoza), in this view of the Asiatic plains, the llaneros command their inhabitants to unleash catastrophes upon civilization.  On the other hand, in _Manifiesto_, Bolívar does not expand the "hegemonic lens of the sublime" into a rhetoric of the immense and overwhealming landscape–as he does in _Delirio_ (Mendoza 294). However, he employs the sublime principle implicit in Humboldt's reasoning, where to give entity to the non-comprehensible or non-measurable human, he resorts to the order of the geographical or the natural.

Bolivar defines as "turbulence" and "torrent" that of the political agency that escaped his will to contain. On the other hand, the notion of "plaything of fortune" puts into operation as a political argument the notion of the uncertainty principle that Humboldt postulates at the end of the first chapter of "Considérations," where a hierarchy of humanity is reaffirmed according to proximity to civilization or nature, but a principle common to all the scales of this hierarchy is recognized, which is "une vie inquiète et orageuse" ("a restless and stormy life"). "Ainsi l'homme se prépare à lui meme une vie inquiète et orageuse, soit que sa grossièreté tienne encore à celle des animaux, doit que l'éclat apparent de la civilisation lui assigne le degré les plus éleve. Le voyageur quis'enfonce sans la nuit des âges, rencontrent sans cesse le tableau uniforme et désolant des dissensions de l'espèce humaine"("Thus man prepares for himself a restless and stormy life, whether his coarseness still holds to that of the animals, or whether the apparent brilliance of civilization assigns him the highest degree. The traveler who sinks into the night of the ages, meets unceasingly the uniform and desolating picture of the dissensions of the human species") <!-- comentar la cita y explicar por qué importa-->(Humboldt 64).

