title:          ​A Haitian Army crosses the Andes
ID:             38
type:           md
compile:        2
charCount:      4825


The improductivity and pointlesness that Humboldt atributes to climbing the Chimborazo is a necessary framing to ponderate the weight of the _Delirio_ in Bolivar's nature writing. Carlos Abreu Mendoza claims that this improductivity of the _Delirio_ proves that the experience of American nature in Humboldt and Bolivar "invariably concludes in the poetization of the natural sublime through writing." (295). The adjective of invariability extrapolates Humboldt's reasoning about the dubious usefulness of climbing Chimborazo, a failed adventure that he considered more appropriate for an entertainment narrative than for scientific knowledge (Humboldt quoted by Abreu Mendoza). Abreu Mendoza interprets Humboldt's analogy of Chimborazo with Michelangelo's dome as the need for a compensatory aesthetic substitute for the insufficient scientific and practical value of the mountain climb. However, rather than defining the Bolivarian and Humboldtian relation with nature, it defines the value of the intertext in the specific case of _Delirio_. We can think of the text as a nerdy response to Humboldt's testimony: if it is useless to climb Chimborazo except for an entertaining narration, and it is more worthwhile to contemplate it from the slopes, I write, overwhelmed by its contemplation, a text in which I narrate my adventure without making the useless excursion. In this sense, it is true that _on Chimborazo_ Humboldt's experience of American nature invariably leads to an aestheticization. But to define the whole Humboldt-Bolivarian American experience exclusively from that writing experience only functions to sustain the messianic reception of the _Delirio_ that Abreu Mendoza well characterizes–a reception that, as we have already exposed, belongs to a posthumous, post and perhaps anti-Bolivarian program of instrumentalization.

On the other hand, the affirmation of a nature that when it is not measurable is excluded from the order of rationality and assimilated to the order of the aesthetic sublime, would place Humboldt and Bolivar still too close to "the old Viconian-Hobbesian idea that we, humans, could have proper knowledge of only civil and political institutions because we made them, while nature remains God's work and ultimately inscrutable to man" (Dipesh Chakrabarty 201). In the case of the former, there would be some echoes of the inscrutable as the limit of the civil in the notion of the plains as a barrier to history, and of the llaneros whose agency belonged to the plains. In the case of Bolivar, in the _Manifesto_ he resorts to providence to give a name to that which politically orders the sunderedness of human race. In both cases, there are other areas of his work that reestablish a radically different relationship with the immeasurable natural of _Views_ and _Manifesto_. But even if we remain within these texts, the mutual contamination of the commensurable and the incommensurable makes it difficult to sustain that vision, which before the _Delirium_ and after the _Manifesto_ Hegel would categorically organize as peoples belonging to history and peoples belonging to geography.

To point out the way in which Bolivar inhabited with reason what in 1814 he attributed to God and nature, a historical inaccuracy in the review of Bolivar presented in the _LAER_ helps us: "After nearly a decade of conflict, he crossed th Andes with a Haitian army and took control of Colombia in 1819" (French and Heffes 76). The apocryphal data produces in a metonymy what Zizek calls a super-rapid historicization: In 1816, after returning to Venezuela with an army of Haitians to decree the abolition of slavery, Bolívar began a series of operations, speeches, pacts, executions and exploits, which led him to cross the platforms with some of the same men he had called beasts in 1814 – and who, like the Haitians, had been slaves, if not outlaws, before becoming republican soldiers. And this accidental metonymy underscores one of the most relevant points of Humboldt and Bolívar's relationship, both in Chimborazo and in his work as a whole: the imaginary integration of the continent's geography, which Manzoni has already pointed out in her  study of Bolívar's writing.

The journey from the Caribbean to the other side of the Andes and Chimborazo, passing through the Amazon, epically allegorizes Humboldt's overview of American nature that revolutionized the 19th century literati. But it also traces the territories of the liberating campaign that Bolívar traversed. Therefore, the image of an Haitian army crossing the Andes, foregrounds two aspects of the Humboldtian influence in Bolívar, more relevant and definitory than what the aesthetic reading of Delirio may reveal: the advocacy for abolitionism, and the struggle for the confederation of what we call today Latin America.

